terrified like to introduce several it's
my working outdoors
I think just
I'm going to call this session to order
because we're we're going to try to have
a summary of the report and any
questions and discussion before begin
serving lunch so we're going to try and
do that in the next half hour and rather
than have people getting hungry and
hungry or we're going to move ahead even
though we're we're short at at the head
table as well as some of the people who
said they were going to be in the
audience I'm Richard Lyon president of
20th century fund I'd like to welcome
you thank you for being here the fund
has a long tradition of bringing
together groups of distinguished
individuals to think about public policy
problems we kind of set a broad scope
for their discussion and then they have
a certain amount of sovereignty in the
way they want to proceed and of course
if you get the right people
that's just acknowledging the fact that
they're going to do it anyway and in
this case that certainly was true I want
to take a moment to recognize the funds
chairman and vice chairman who are both
here in the audience today Brewster
Denny and a congressman Jim Leach with
that I'm going to turn the program over
to the chairman of this distinguished
group an old friend of mine and someone
well-known I'm sure to everyone in this
audience and a man who very ably guided
this complicated and strong-minded group
to a consensus on a great many difficult
and delicate issues so Richard Neustadt
glad to have you thank you let me
introduce the members the group who are
here they keep shifting their seats so I
may get them out of order but on my left
is Walter Murphy a constitutional
historian and general constitutional law
specialist from Princeton Oh on my right
is David Aaron who's that experienced it
was an author but who's had governmental
experience Oh
in both of the legislative and executive
branches touching on these matters
deeply David in my absence last summer
got stuck with the job of drafting a
work doing a working draft from which we
we worked and refined for the rest of
our time so I'm going to make David
summarize our recommendations shortly
since he's the man who has most reason
to remember them best but let me go on
with introductions John Whitehead who
was Deputy Secretary of State in mr.
Reagan's second term the man with the
most recent experience a relevant sense
of these matters in government all on
whom he relied extensively in that
regard and beyond him Stan Turner Oh who
was a director of the Central
Intelligence Agency of during the
administration of President Carter and
beyond him is Bruce Berkowitz who's one
of the co-authors of the underlying of
background paper which you find printed
with with our report the document from
which we began our work and which has
been updated to include not only
developments in experience with covert
action but developments in legislation
including the recent intelligence act on
last August
now that oh i'm hotting Carter I was
afraid he wouldn't arrive but he has and
and Lloyd Cutler Oh in that order
hotting who when mr. Carter's time with
State Department spokesman and Lloyd
Cutler who doesn't really need an
introduction to a Washington audience
but his government experience included a
stint as White House Counsel and the
same ministration
now this is a report on covert action
and American democracy what we were
asked to do was look at both and
consider the relation of one to the
other covert action although sometimes
sporadically undertaken by one or
another agency of our government only
became a regular activity of the
American government Oh in the course of
the Second World War
oh the organizational mechanisms that
conducted it were broken up after the
war and then reassembled in the face of
the Cold War between 1947 and 1951
centered organizationally in the Central
Intelligence Agency and under the under
the charge of the Director of Central
Intelligence covert action was initially
thought to mean deniable plausibly
deniable activity by government an
activity which the responsible
authorities in government the
responsible officials of government
could plausibly disassociate themselves
from and which foreign governments that
might be affected could plausibly claim
no knowledge of whether or not they had
any that that definition has been
superseded all in the course of time oh
and given numbers of highly publicized
mostly unsuccessful Oh undertakings by
another definition a statutory
definition in the recent intelligence
Act
let me just read it so we all understand
what we're talking about here
covert action is now defined statutorily
as an activity or activities of the
United States government to influence
political economic or military
conditions abroad where it is intended
that the governmental role will not be
apparent or acknowledged publicly
nothing is said precisely about
plausible deniability and for very good
reason given the intervening experience
this was intended by Congress as I I
read its reports to narrow the
definition Walter Murphy our
constitutional specialist Oh in his
concurrence to our report which you will
find beginning on page 16 quite rightly
raises the question of whether
inadvertently it may not broaden it more
than Congress intended regardless it is
the definition which a bipartisan
majority in Congress and the President
of the United States have approved as
recently as nine months ago and it's the
definition therefore with which we begin
now we were asked to do place such
activity in the context of American
democracy of our constitutional system
and our first conclusion Oh was after
after considerable discussion that
covert action was inherently in conflict
with our democratic aspirations
inherently in conflict with the thrust
of our constitutional system because
inherently the secrecy intended to be
involved is at odds with the
accountability
the constitutional order of presupposes
it is the essence of our constitutional
system that each branch of government is
in some degree accountable to each other
branch and that all are accountable in
some degree to the public the President
and Congress directly accountable to the
their electorates activity of the sort I
have just defined in legislative terms
is inherently in conflict with that
aspiration oh that was our first
conclusion our second conclusion was
that while the Cold War has ended and it
was the Cold War that initially in the
1940s justified the renewal of these
activities in peace - well the Cold War
has ended the future is sufficiently
obscured and dangers in it sufficiently
evident that we could not in conscience
say that under no circumstances covert
activities should be available to the
government of the United States on the
other hand it was the feeling of all but
one of us that their availability should
be tightly constrained first they should
be pursuant to publicly articulated
policy oh the a stronger standard that
is in the current legislation and they
should be undertaken as exceptional
matters supplementing over
action and not independently up beyond
that all about one of us Oh
concluded that those standards required
three of general undertakings let me
just read what they are first that there
should be procedures assuring effective
executive and congressional oversight
plugging all the loopholes Oh revealed
five years ago by the iran-contra affair
and while the present legislation Oh
does a good deal with those loopholes
and so do procedures undertaken in the
executive branch by no means have all of
them been plucked we propose that they
all be plug second that President
Congress alike be attentive to the
development of a broad consensus on the
principles under which covert action
Beach should be undertaken in the
post-war world and broad consensus means
public consensus it means the main
streams of both political parties and
third that there be a reorientation of
covert action away from Cold War
objectives and methods no longer
reflective of compelling national
interests toward new threats and
challenges that do reflect such
interests compelling national interests
and not otherwise
those three broad notions are the ones
that led us to specific recommendations
and I am going to ask David in a moment
to run through the specific
recommendations one member of our group
felled himself unable to follow this
logic that far
and instead in eloquent dissent hodding
Carter has proposed simply to ban covert
actions of any kind in the post-war
period the rest of us felt unable
sympathetic but unable to follow that
lead oh and instead of granting the
risks as Walter Murphy states that such
a ban will not be enforceable and
granting the fact that some of the
dangers of the future are now visible
and granting the final fact that
President and Congress have recently
spoken in the other direction the rest
of us preferred to follow the course of
procedural tightening consensus building
and reorientation up to that end we
develop eight specific recommendations
some of them with subheads
I doubt that they will sound like eight
when David offers them to you and I'm
going to ask David Aaron now as the as
the draftsman to run through them in
detail then we'll go to questions and
the questions Oh can't involve either
the report or the dissents from the
report unfortunately the other dissenter
who had a single specific plate to make
Ted Sorensen can't be here but David
will cover its substance oh when he
speaks to you they thank you very much I
might just stress at the outset that the
fundamental question of whether or not
in the after the collapse of the
communist Empire and the collapse of
the communist movement as a threat to
the United States we should continue any
covert action activities was perhaps the
most intensively debated and discussed
subject in with the group and a broad
consensus did emerge that we should
continue to maintain such a capability
in the arsenal of American policy and
the reasons were and I'd like to
elaborate them on them slightly before
going into our recommendations that
first of all the world does remain a
dangerous place and we're faced with
threats of proliferation of nuclear
chemical biological warfare missile
capabilities we're confronted with the
problems of international narcotics
trade there are issues in regional
instability there is international
terrorism directed at the United States
and our citizens and each of these are
areas in which covert action may at some
point in the future have an appropriate
role in countering because the
international system is still a system
of sovereign states there is no
international police force to whom we
have recourse and the United States must
look after its own security in the last
analysis I think it also was concluded
that it would be inconsistent to permit
the president the United States as we do
under the War Powers Act to conduct
military operations on his own
initiative but not take undertake lesser
measures such as covert action in fact I
think most of the task force would agree
with Walter Murphy's concurring view
that we know too little about the future
and too much about the past to think
that the security of the United States
will never again be in serious danger
covert action is an instrument that
should be available to the President to
deal with such circumstances let me
reiterate the three points that
professor Neustadt made about minimizing
the conflict between covert action and
the American democratic process first of
all that oversight must be effective
second of all there should be a
consensus on the broad principles under
which covert actions carried out and
thirdly there must be a reorientation of
covert action operations towards the new
threats that we face and I'll say more
about that later when we first address
the question of oversight procedures the
tower Commission report national
security decision directive 286 and
public law 102 88 passed by the Congress
go far to establish effective procedures
for oversight and I think that the task
force felt that both the Congress and
the executive branch that deserved
congratulations for a very difficult
effort and in many respects a successful
one as well unfortunately these
documents and these agreements still
fall short and several important
respects first of all and surprisingly
they failed to plug important gaps
revealed by the iran-contra scandal only
five years ago
beyond that public law 102 88 can be
interpreted even to legitimize some of
the actions in that case that were
regarded as key abuses finally neither
the law nor the executive branch
regulations say very much about the
principles on which covert action should
be based and nothing about the policy
objectives that it should serve let me
be more specific about the question of
oversight procedures the first issue is
the question of keeping the Congress
fully and currently informed
there was I believe in the legislation
major progress in this area beyond the
conflicts that have existed between the
executive branch and the Congress over
how much the Congressional Oversight
Committee should know and when the law
provides for advanced notification of
covert actions to the committee's in
most circumstances however in
extraordinary situations the president
made limit notification to the majority
and minority leaders of the House and
Senate and of the two committees in
other words he may restrict the
dissemination and notification required
to eight individuals in the Congress
finally the law provides that if the
president does not provide timely
notification of covert action operations
he must at some future point explain
himself to the Congress now timely
notification has been subject to great
debate between the Congress and the
executive branch for well over a decade
and in the legislation and accompanying
executive branch regulations they in
effect agreed the two sides to disagree
there is a letter from the president
which is contained in in our report and
in the conference report page 110 the
appendix if you want to look at it which
says that it lays out the basic
procedures for notification it says that
in almost all instances the president
will give prior notice of covert actions
to the committee's in rare instances
when he does not provide advance
notification he will do so in a few days
and in practice that has come to be 48
hours however the president's letter
states that he still asserts the right
to withhold notice indefinitely based on
his constitutional authority the
Congress disagrees with this position
and the task force agrees with the
Congress on this matter
the president and the Congress have
agreed and the task force concurs that
in some cases notification should be
restricted to only aid members and we
concur that notification may be made
after the fact but for the president to
go further and to assert a
constitutional power to withhold
notifying anyone outside the executive
branch indefinitely is in the view of
the task force an abridgment of the
accountability required by our
democratic process the task force also
notes that these commitments and
procedures are contained concerning
timely notification are contained in a
presidential letter they do not have the
force of law nor are they're binding the
president's successor in the view of the
task force this should be remedied in
this connection I want to note that one
member of our task force Ted Sorensen
dissents from this view it is his
argument which is concisely and I think
effectively stated that in all cases
there should be prior notification to
the Congress of covert action operations
finally let me point out in regard to
notification that it was one of the keys
to the iran-contra scandal that
notification of these activities were
withheld from the Congress and under the
theory of constitutional authority
proposed by the president this good
still happened
another abuse revealed by the
iran-contra events was the use of
private entities to conduct must of the
business of the in Ron contra operation
in fact there were assertions in the
course of that investigation that one
goal of the caper was the creation of a
permanent quote off the shelf
covert action capability not accountable
to the Congress and possibly not
accountable to the executive branch as
well one might have expected that PL 102
88 would curb this practice instead and
view of this task force it provides a
backdoor authorization for the existence
of such entities and for their use and I
would direct you to PL 102 88 section
503 a for that's on page 101 of appendix
D the law only states that the
presidential finding accompanying any
covert action must specify not identify
the use of such groups combined with the
right to withhold the presidential
finding indefinitely from the Congress
one has a formula for another
iran-contra situation it is the strong
recommendation of the task force that
the use of such entities be forbidden
now this does not mean that the CIA
could not use proprietary organizations
as it has in the past that it cannot
conduct contractual arrangements with
legitimate private or corporate groups
it does not mean that the CIA cannot
collaborate with foreign intelligence
services or their proprietaries but the
use of mission impossible freelancers
accountable to no one should be
prohibited
a third abuse of the iraq revealed in
the iran-contra events was the use of
government agencies other than the
Central Intelligence Agency to carry out
covert action in that case it was the
Nationals
curity council staff itself again one
might have expected that PL 102 88 would
rule out such practices instead we find
that it spells out procedures for doing
it and there I would refer you to
section 503 a3 appendix D page 101 these
procedures would appear to apply the
same restrictions and reporting
requirements on other agencies as for
the CIA
in the conduct of covert action
operations however it is also shot
through with all of the same exceptions
that I have mentioned earlier in
particular national security decision
directive 286 paragraph roman 3 which
you'll find on page 93 of the book
requires that the heads of other
agencies conducting covert action
operations keep the director of Central
Intelligence fully and currently
informed of their activities which means
in practice as we all know that if the
president so decides the DCI it may not
be informed at all the point that must
be understood here is that the DCI is
not necessarily going to be in charge of
all covert African operations this in
our judgment can severely affect
congressional oversight only the
intelligence committees have the
capability to oversee covert action
operations and as in the case of
iran-contra even they can fail if covert
action is carried out by the Pentagon or
by the Treasury Department or the
Department of Energy or the Department
of State or commerce or labor or the
National Security Council staff the
cognizant committees are unlikely to
stumble across it for these reasons the
task force concluded that the DCI must
be held accountable for all covert
action operations by the United States
government no matter how many other
agencies may be involved no matter how
they may be involved
now in the interest of time let me just
add that in addition to these points the
task force proposes tightening other
requirements and procedures they're set
forth I think pretty directly in the
book for example we would draw a tighter
line on counterintelligence and covert
I'm sorry and cover and deception
activities by the military that would
have effects similar to that of covert
action if you want to get into how wide
that so I'll be happy to address the
question in the Q&A period secondly we
suggest a paper trail for objections
that may be made in the executive branch
to propose covert action operations and
finally we strongly suggest that there
be a written assessment of the
consequences of public exposure of
proposed covert action operations so
that the president and his senior
advisors can be fully aware of the
downside risk which is often ignored in
the course of policymaking in this area
now a second major area of our
recommendations concern the principles
by which covert action should be
conducted in this respect the task force
proposes the following first of all that
covert action never be regarded as
routine it should be regarded as an
exceptional act brought called forth by
threats or challenges that create a
compelling national interest that
justify of bridging the democratic
process secondly and I think dick
Neustadt touched on this covert action
should support publicly articulated
policies not as in the present law
merely identifiable policies current law
does not identify how these policies are
to be identified nor by whom the
identification is to be made
third we recommend that covert action
not be used to advance the commercial
interests of individual American
companies private concern
and we've included that because there's
been a lot of discussion of how
intelligence activities have to be
reoriented to deal with some of our
economic challenges that we face abroad
without going into the all of the
details of what that might imply for
covert action
the one thing that seemed quite clear to
us was that to mobilize government
covert action operations on behalf of
individual American companies was likely
to not only be counterproductive for the
United States government which
counterproductive for the companies
concerned as well
finally assassination I'm sorry that's
not finally but I'm assassination which
is prohibited by executive order and our
judgment should be written into law an
example of discussion of this subject in
public was the recent Gulf War where
there was many calls for action that
would be taken to get rid of Saddam
Hussein our suggestion to turn this into
a law is based on the recognition that
of all the leaders in the world
the American president is perhaps the
most vulnerable to assassination and we
are the country that has most suffered
from the assassination of our political
leadership finally we believe that
covert action should be undertaken only
when overt means are unavailable
insufficient or too costly in terms of
human life and we would I would point
out in this connection that over it
means today are much more accepted than
they were when covert action was first
developed the for example we have
organizations such as the National
Democratic Institute of the National
Endowment for democracy the National
Republican Institute that are active in
many areas of the world Eastern Europe
even Russia engaged in party building an
activity that in the past would have
been considered feasible only by
clandestine means lastly covert action
in the judgment of the task force needs
to be refocused
on current threats and challenges at the
outset I mentioned the spread of nuclear
chemical biological and missile
capabilities terrorism international
narcotics traffic in addition I would
add the aid and comfort to those who are
promoting democracy resisting tyranny or
being deprived of fundamental human
rights these objectives and challenges
does not mean that there should be an
Open Sesame for covert action we have to
continue to be extremely discriminating
and selective but let me just take two
examples to point out what I mean the
proliferation of missile capabilities
nuclear capabilities is most often a
clandestine activity conducted through
the intelligence services of other
countries and the response it may well
turn out would be to use our own
clandestine capabilities as well I would
in this connection refer you to the
recent ship incident the ship from North
Korea headed for the Persian Gulf which
the Navy supposedly could not find there
but if it had under our under existing
international law and and comedy there
really was nothing the Navy could do if
they hadn't intercepted it anyway
secondly I would suggest that the
possible use of covert instruments to
support those who are fighting for
democracy is not something that has
disappeared with the collapse of the
Soviet empire
there have been press reports for
example that the United States helped
solidary in its darkest days of being
oppressed and ruled illegal by the
regime in Poland personally I hope that
those reports are true but I think we
have to face the fact that a billion
people in Asia today still live under a
communist dictatorship and there are
other dictatorships around the world
people who are suffering having their
human
rights abused and deprived for whom the
only sustenance may be that provided by
a clandestine means now let me just
conclude by saying that our
deliberations and our recommendations
are neither partisan nor are they pro
executive branch or pro congressional
branch of government in particular I
think it's important to recognize that
the congressional oversight is just as
important as restrictions to be placed
executive branch conduct of covert
action and I think that we have a right
to be concerned about the vigor of some
congressional oversight let me take the
iran-contra case once again in that case
the Congress passed a welter of laws
concerning aid to the Contras some of it
contradictory and in our judgment some
of it invited circumvention and the
administration at the time made no
secret of its desire to aid the Contras
and yet it does not appear from at least
the public record that there was any
particular vigilance by the intelligence
committees to see if that situation
might have implications for their
oversight responsibilities so in
conclusion is our strong feeling that if
covert action is to be reconciled with
the requirements of American democracy
vigilance will be required on the part
of everyone involved thank you thank you
David
oh well we want to turn to your
questions and I want to do it in the
following a double fashion oh oh we will
start by taking questions up here and I
will feel them all to whichever member
of the committee I think Jeff oh you
might most profitably hear from or take
them myself oh one of the other oh that
will go on until the service of lunch
gets too noisy to be endured Oh
at which point I'm going to release the
members of the task force to go down and
share in luncheon with the understanding
that we will each join a different table
that's why there are some reserved signs
around and you may then continue your
questioning all through lunch of
whichever Oh member you happen to get oh
that way the question answer period will
not come to an end before the whole
occasion passes off in dessert and
coffee
I hope there's dessert there is take the
own system and the beginning of lunch
and the beginning of the noise will
depend entirely on the directors
decision I have no part in that now
oh let me ask four questions if you just
raise your hands oh I'll do my best to
be responsive yes check I detect what
may be merely a a language problem or a
miscommunication on page seven it says
if US military and counterintelligence
activities have the objective of
effecting major changes in the national
defense policies of foreign governments
etc
well in the act that mr. Aaron referred
to traditional military activities are
excluded from the definition of covert
action and counterintelligence as such
is not covert action so what are we
talking about
I noticed mr. Aaron said that he could
explain this further in the Q&A I
suspected I know it's military civilian
disconnect here in terms of language I
may be wrong I don't think there is a
disconnect well indeed I have to say
that that one of our members general
Willie Smith worked very hard on that
language and intended to be here today
to explain it if questions were asked
but since he isn't
and David volunteered I will let him
take a crack at it
oh that others may wish to join in David
we we can do we can speak from here
again
yeah let's see if I can find the
language in the act but let me let me
tell you what we were trying to deal
with and what we were trying to achieve
I couldn't find the language from the
act to contrast it the effort of our
recommendation as I indicated in my
presentation was to try to draw the line
a little tighter that it was drawn in
the act and what we're concerned about
here for example let me take
counterintelligence first is that in the
process of counterintelligence
operations particularly double agent
operations it is not unusual to provide
information to your double agent which
is not true is in fact deceptive and it
is also possible to provide information
through your double agent that has an
impact an important impact on the
policies of the government that thinks
he's a legitimate agent of theirs there
have at least according to lore and
legend of been occasions in the past in
which such information has had an
important effect on decisions made
other governments affecting their
military capabilities and indeed
affecting the threats they've post the
United States it is our intention to try
to make clear that those such activities
in the counterintelligence field should
be reviewed
should be monitored for their possible
political consequences on the
decision-making of ones of the target
country and if they are indeed capable
of changing their policies in a
significant way they should come under
the same reporting requirements and the
same deliberative procedures cover
interception activities have have
similar potential and if they don't fine
but I mean it's it's so when you
identify the fact that this may be a
problem of language you're correct and
our effort is to make that language a
little tighter yes sir
yes I'm David Greece CIA my question is
similar to Chuck's and it goes to page
30 of the report and it concerns a
definitional matter that has troubled me
for years and years and I simply wonder
whether the the task force debated it or
disgusted
as you will notice in the first tick
that covert action really is defined in
a negative sense that is it is
everything which is not something else
in short it is everything which is not
does not have the primary purpose of
acquiring intelligence or is traditional
counterintelligence activities
everything which is not those things is
covert action this is a little bit like
saying there are speed signs posted on
this highway and your dare not exceed
them except in many places the sign
hasn't been put up yet it's very
difficult to define something that way
what is a covert action is is there in
fact a clear line between acquiring
intelligence and conducting covert
action I think those of us who've Russ
with us have found the line is not so
clear and on many occasions we debate
long and hard whether in fact a
particular activity is a covert action
you are reading from the background
paper not the task force report and
you're raising an issue which has always
been with us we understand it oh I'll
let David wants to answer this question
let me let me make only this general
observation to start with members of the
task force were aware that you have
wrestled with that question and that
various members of political
administrations have wrestled with it
over the years the thrust of what we're
saying is people on a wrestle harder and
the body English ought to be different
than it has been at various times covert
action ought to be something not
undertake except in support of publicly
articulated policy if overt action is
clearly insufficient to do the job now
that doesn't mean people won't have to
go on wrestling we're at that great
point
but I think it was the consensus of
group that that the the wrestle ought to
take place or with it with a rather
different sense of where the line you
know where one's looking for a lot that
has sometimes been the case in the past
David you want to go on yeah I I might
just say that in the course of our
deliberations which did extend over a
quiet period of time we had developed a
definition of our own which looking at
the draft definition which was being
prepared by the Congress which as you
point out it's sort of everything left
over after after the government does
everything else we thought of saying
well why don't we turn this around and
say covert action are those activities
traditionally carried out by the Central
Intelligence Agency for the purposes of
X and so forth and so forth instead of
going through all these traditional
activities being performed by the
military and the State Department and
the Peace Corps and whoever else might
be involved
unfortunately the Congress went ahead
and adopted that before we could make
this point so we simply dropped it from
our recommendations any other members of
the task force have any comments at this
point
I really want to add dicted it c-suite
David sentences just before that tick
are the most positive definition of
covert action that we've ever had the
Hughes Ryan amendment which was the
previous definition was totally anything
else but whereas you do have a pretty
clear expression here which I thought
the Congress did a good job on saying to
influence political economic conditions
when it's intended the role will not be
apparent or acknowledged publicly I
think we had about a discussion of the
task force about that and whether maybe
it would have been desirable to be say
not a parent or acknowledged publicly
for a long period of time
you know there's all operations are
secret when they start but the question
is do you really want this one is it
really injurious to the United States if
it ever comes out that we were behind it
yes David Newsom formally as a state
department clearly one of the most
difficult kinds of covert action to
remain deniable is the paramilitary
certainly the large-scale paramilitary
activity I know that in the past there
has been some discussion of separating
out responsibility for paramilitary
operations from the Central Intelligence
Agency and from the normal definition of
covert action I wonder if the committee
gave any attention to that what we did
discuss it does anybody you want to pick
up that line of comment or shall I
simply well I could say this much I
think it's clear that the and I'm
seeking personally now not from the task
force I think it's it's clear that the
the provision that provides for other
agencies to conduct covert action that
is contained in the law is primarily
aimed at the Department of Defense and
because of the rivalry between the
Department of Defense and the CIA it's
likely that that's the reason you have
this arrangement for sort of Co
responsibilities which exists in the act
well having not been candid about what
the issue was in the law unfortunately
the law could apply to any agency of
government including the National
Security Council and this is why we
identified it as a potential area of a
problem
yes oh I think I oughta move to that
table now for a moment yeah we'll come
right back I'm sorry spent those same
hours with this commission and the first
thing is there has never been as
generous a group of people tolerant of
the pinpricks of a guerrilla activity
which repeatedly tried to fight over the
same ground that had already been lost
and in that tolerance absorbing at least
some of the dissent this is an
extraordinarily knowledgeable group as
you can see from the Seavey's absent me
about this subject and frankly
dissenting as thoroughly as I do I want
to reaffirm one point in that dissent
that if this government were to accept
the recommendations of this report we
would be a lot better off than we are
now my problem was that I thought that
we came to examine the Old Testament and
to come up with a new one in light of a
changed world situation in writing the
New Testament we reaffirmed our faith in
the enduring God I came out of course an
atheist it is one of the problems I
think of all commissions which is to ask
themselves why are we here
and I think at end of day my concern is
we answered it we are here to ratify
that which is I think this is an
opportunity as in so many areas of our
government here in the early 1990s
to rethink practices which after all are
not as old as a republic in their
bureaucratic form and which are as old
as a republic in their assault on a
number of the Republic's virtues I want
to repeat however that my mates
up here on this platform it throughout
the Commission have heard all this more
times than they ever need to hear it
again and they heard it with great
generosity it has to be said however
that was always well spoken eloquent and
appealing there's a was a question here
of it someone I had recognized
well-liked before I realized the haughty
I wish to make that comment and put his
hand down oh okay one of the whether in
considering this recommendation the the
Commission considered the likely
practical consequence of having a covert
operations capability in effect that is
I think the history of this we were told
we needed to look at the history as well
as the future is that if you have such a
capability and if in principle it is
sanctioned it will be used in a vast
number of cases which do not meet the
criteria that'll a doubt by the
Commission simply because the executive
branch will assert whatever the criteria
are that they are met and so the
recommendation is one that is a
practical matter it seems to me the
history shows simply cannot be
accomplished
well I think that argument applies
equally indeed most of us I believe
think it applies more strongly to the
notion of a ban the the the the central
idea of this group
I'll state this and let my colleagues
respond to it is that in a very large
don't with very diverse capabilities and
many of them not all of which are going
to be disbanded no matter what the
legislative specification may be in
general the the most the best safeguards
are those which stem from procedure
couple to oversight procedure involving
both branches of government and
oversight involving both branches of
government shared responsibility and
shared authority between President
Congress oh now that implies a spirit Oh
which mr. Bush for one has been prepared
to apparently on the public record to
offer in practice but not in theory only
administration's that are prepared to
acknowledge first the importance of
accountability and second the sharing of
authority are likely to be held in check
oh by whatever Oh
we come up with
and I think we understand that what we
are saying is procedures Oh shared
oversight all continuous attention to
the oversight Oh a narrowing of usage to
the minimum the consistent with our two
requirements of public articulates
supporting publicly articulated policy
and supplementing overt action which is
always to be preferred first the if you
if you get public officials
well not prepared to respect such
procedures oh and such a generally held
ideas then then you're likely to have
trouble I mean you can't you can't
legislate perfection but but we think
that if if Congress were to enact and
administration's were to enact the
procedures the additional procedural
safeguards that we suggest and in the
process recognize their joint
responsibility and that became the
tradition in which this government
operated you would not have what you're
talking about anybody want to elaborate
on that Mort if you impute that much
malevolence to the secular branch then
you have to impute that if there were a
ban on covert action they'd avoid it -
III think controlling it is a better
course that was of course debated the
counter-argument of course is that once
having established let us say that
murder is okay under certain
circumstances you automatically
introduce the idea that murder maybe Oh
under a number of circumstances if you
say murder is not okay it at least is
understood to be that which might fall
into edict it is always available for
expansion once it is tolerated in partly
partially I want to though it's fun I
think I've my task here is to move to
questions of we come back around to the
issue at lunch yeah I'd like to agree
with I think a main proposition of
hodding Carter but I guess I I'm not an
I didn't become an atheist I came to
believe in another god but it seemed to
me a hardened Carter touches on a point
and I'd be interested in the rest of the
task force's response basically the
committee this task force that the way
you've described it and we've only had
of course a few minutes to to look over
the findings and so on basically though
this seems to be the consensus that
existed at the time of the church
committee and the immediate period after
the church committee although some of
the propositions or recommendations are
so slightly updated in a modern context
obviously there wasn't there was a cold
it's the post Cold War period that
wasn't present then and some other
oversight provisions which weren't
present in 1975-76 basically if I
understood would Harlan Carter
suggestions basically you've come to the
same position that you came to in
1975-76 or at least that the country did
at that time at the time of the passage
of Hughes Ryan subsequently amended the
Carter administration's EO 1203 six and
so on but basically you can't you've
come to that same position and if I
understood Carter's position was
basically saying no we should be coming
to another kind of position now my
question really is a first I'd like to
know if that's correct have you actually
there hasn't been an evolution in the
thinking about this subject since ten or
fifteen years ago when that sort of the
consensus was formed about the oversight
regulations and the principles that
guide American covert action which I
think you're pretty consistent with but
the second question is did you consider
taking up other questions such as what
makes for effective covert action you
grant that sometimes it's necessary
although albeit you want it to be very
limited but it seems to me one of things
the church committee didn't take
and with the country's the cut one of
the things the country has not studied
is what makes for effective use of this
instrument other than making it
compatible with American values well let
me come to that second ask David who was
the observe this for the church
commission whether he thinks there's
been an evolution I think there has been
an evolution and I think there's been an
evolution both in the executive branch
and in the Congress and we now have
major congressional intelligence
committees that are experts who have
deep contacts within the intelligence
community who are capable of following
all of the arguments know the issues
backwards and forwards and so forth
which makes for a very different kind of
relationship I think people would say
perhaps not happily that the director of
central intelligence works as much for
the intelligence committees as he does
to the President of the United States
and sometimes that's considered by some
people is good and by others is bad I
think that the abuses that one saw in
the iran-contra case were examples of
efforts to get around the very controls
and procedures that were established on
the basis of the church committee
findings and the regulations and so
forth that were established afterwards
and it got them into trouble and I think
that we in some respects had to relearn
the lessons of the church committee but
we also had to update them because we
had to look at different ways of
proceedings such as the use of so-called
private entities that have no
responsibility to anyone or the use of
agencies not traditionally involved in
covert action activities and I might
just say by way of explanation and my
reference a moment ago to the Peace
Corps it didn't suggest that they've
ever been involved in anything like that
it was fairly facetious but I think
those kinds of steps are the part of the
executive branch to wiggle out from
under these restrictions suggest that we
have a continuing process
I mean this is not a cat-and-mouse game
but it's an iterative process in which
we try to refine this instrument and I
think that our conclusions also I
hesitate to say this but I'll bail
assert it and maybe I'll be contradicted
I think the task force also basically
concluded that the the extent of covert
action activity by the United States
government in the current political
circumstances ought to be really quite
small this is not something that that
would be a broad scale activity as it
existed in the past decades let me let
me somebody make two further
observations I think the fundamental
difference between hidings position and
that of the rest of us is that cutting
concludes there's no learning process
that's going to get the appointive
subordinates of elected executive
officials together with congressmen
selected for the intelligence committees
and their staffs to honor the the the
plain logic of the Constitution of the
United States with respect to shared
authority accountability and
responsibility to set procedures I think
the rest of us are still working on the
notion that if you get the procedural
context right which we don't think has
been done adequately up to now well the
very process of getting it right and
achieving a consensus on what Oh covert
action should be used for redirecting it
away from the Cold War but that those
processes themselves might give you
the kind of responsibility the part of
both executive and legislative officials
oh let's water it Oh
Harding doesn't believe it we are
hopeful of it
oh the and I think I think I can speak
for the rest of us in saying that we we
think the evolution since the Church
Committee is an evolution including the
work of this task force including the
degree to which we although having
served at very different times and for
different administration's of both
parties or can come to something of a
consensus oh now the other thing I'd
like I don't think I'd like to add with
respect to your second question is that
one of our recommendations for the sake
of public accountability and it's its
broadest terms we think the Central
Intelligence Agency in cooperation with
the congressional committees should
undertake a detailed review of the
experience with covert action from the
beginning Oh
weighing precisely the questions of
effectiveness and in effect of me Oh
should make a a Declassified version
public and should reiterate the process
perhaps once a decade or so in the
absence of that no group of people
however informed by by particular past
experiences can do it and we were
sensible enough to understand we
couldn't do it so we didn't do it but we
think that should be done Oh anybody
else want to add here
yes there is just one notion here I want
to add that is an exact statement of my
position which I can only think of as
the deep southern position which is to
say the extremely conservative position
which is a reading of man which is just
at odds with the Commission's reading
yes I do believe that given the
opportunity to do wrong we will do it
particularly if we are already told it's
not wrong Oh
any other questions here yes sir just
question about the really how
substantive the the criteria for covert
action are that you put out and not in
the sense that that whatever standard
you have the administration will decide
that it's been met but and your first
one is that it has to be in supportive
of articulated policies the last time
this was debated or in Congress I said
consistent with articulated policies but
you could have something that's in
supportive and articulated policies that
that's inconsistent with it
so I wonder whether substantively that's
a restriction what is in what is in the
present legislation is consistent with
identifiable policy nothing is said
about who identified now in my view
Ronald Reagan was perfectly capable and
probably did in his own mind identify as
policy Oh both his is for the form of
aid to the Contras that the the
administration undertook well and the
military assistance to to Iran oh that's
the distinction we're trying to draw
court up rather than consistent no I'm
talking about the different be
identifiable and publicly articulate the
other thing is just how realistic is it
to think that covert action will only be
used as you say as a supplement to over
action I mean you're in effect you're
presuming that the government should try
some everything it can overtly and make
sure that it's failed before it does a
covert actions it realistically is that
it is that the way the government said
we're going to do it if they think
something's worth worth achieving in
addition to failure we talked about cost
like David to to reiterate that point I
think it's important the language is if
I have it here the language is when over
it means they're unavailable
insufficient or even if sufficient judge
too costly in terms of human life this
is not you know a terribly stern test
but and it's one that policymakers in
our judgment need to apply too often in
my experience and I'm sure of others is
prayer in this room covert action has
been - has been turned - because there
was a desire to not don't just stand
there do something we've got a show that
we're trying to do something that in our
judgment is really the worst possible
reason for doing this and I know that
people in the agency who have to carry
out these do something orders find it
pretty appalling as well so this
language here is simply to make the
point that there are other alternatives
that they ought to be considered very
carefully by policy makers and indeed as
sort of priam Buehler statutory language
it seems to us to be a very good
principle to implement now is this
practical will they do it anyway well I
can't tell you but I can tell you that
if it's written in law you've got people
like hiding who will sit around the
table and say hey wait a minute this you
know this doesn't strike me as something
that we can't do in some other way no
just so I understand normally you don't
you don't know in advance whether over
means we'll you don't always know in
advance whether
or it means will achieve your objective
do you mean that you should try them and
see whether they work first no I think
you'd make your best judgment I know
what we're talking about here is that
for example is that you can achieve some
of the things that covert action
attempts to achieve by military action
but the cost in terms of human life
would seem to be disproportionate to the
objectives involved now it's been
pointed out to me that some of some
members of this task force find it very
difficult to watch all that food going
over there and not being able to have
anything so I'm gonna rule that at this
this at this juncture we moved to our to
our fallback position and if if all
members of the task force and mr.
Berkowitz will please join different
tables you can then carry on the
Inquisition as long as you like
[Music]
members of the task force on covert
action and American democracy held this
[Music]
members of the task force on covert
action and American democracy held this
news conference today to discuss their
report on the role of covert action
members of the task force called for new
rules for covert action in order to
reduce tensions between the executive
and legislative branches of the federal
government the task force was sponsored
by the 20th century fund a nonprofit
organization that supervises research on
economic social and political issues